Changes in Cumulocity IoT devices are automatically processed by Analytics Builder [PAB-4963] (#3954)
SoftwareAG/c8y-docs: content/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder-bundle/models-and-devices.md

The default value of this tenant option is `not has(c8y_IsVirtualDevice)`. As long as you do not change this tenant option, virtual devices are not shown as they would not make sense in an analytic model. If you change the value for this tenant option, make sure to specify all managed objects that you want to see in the search result.

See also [Configuration](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#configuration).

### Support for dynamic changes to group and asset hierarchy {#dynamic-hierarchy-changes}

By default, input blocks in Analytics Builder now support dynamic changes to the group hierarchy. This includes the addition, deletion, and update of devices or assets, as well as structural changes within groups. Analytics Builder models automatically adapt to these changes, processing data based on the most current group or asset hierarchy.

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}

> This is also applicable to [Smart rules plugin](/streaming-analytics/smart-rules-plugin#what-is-the-smart-rules-plugin)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is also applicable to the [Smart rules plugin](/streaming-analytics/smart-rules-plugin#what-is-the-smart-rules-plugin).
```

{{</ c8y-admon-info >}}

> **Key Behaviors and Limitations**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Key behavior and limitations**
```

> - *Deletion of Source/Target*: If a specific device, group, or asset configured as an input or output in the model is deleted, the deployed model will automatically transition to a Failed state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Deletion of source/target*: If a specific device, group, or asset configured as an input or output in the model is deleted, the deployed model will automatically transition to a FAILED state.
```

> - *Empty Groups*: If a monitored group becomes empty, the model remains in the Active state. It will resume processing data as soon as a new device, group, or asset is added to the group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Empty groups*: If a monitored group becomes empty, the model remains in the ACTIVE state. It will resume processing data as soon as a new device, group, or asset is added to the group.
```

> - *Nested & Cascaded Deletions*: Dynamic detection does not support the deletion of nested groups or the cascaded deletion of devices. In these scenarios, the model must be undeployed and redeployed to recognize the updated hierarchy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Nested & cascaded deletions*: Dynamic detection does not support the deletion of nested groups or the cascaded deletion of devices. In these scenarios, the model must be undeployed and redeployed to recognize the updated hierarchy.
```

> To enable this behavior for custom blocks, please refer to the [Analytics Builder Block SDK documentation](https://cumulocity-iot.github.io/apama-analytics-builder-block-sdk/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable this behavior for custom blocks, refer to the [Analytics Builder Block SDK documentation](https://cumulocity-iot.github.io/apama-analytics-builder-block-sdk/).
```

The default value of this tenant option is `not has(c8y_IsVirtualDevice)`. As long as you do not change this tenant option, virtual devices are not shown as they would not make sense in an analytic model. If you change the value for this tenant option, make sure to specify all managed objects that you want to see in the search result.

See also [Configuration](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#configuration).

### Group hierarchy changes {#group-hierarchy-changes}

Input blocks in an Analytics Builder model receive data from a group of devices or assets. Any change to this group hierarchy is now detected automatically. This includes new device or asset, deletions, updates and changes in the hierarchy of devices or sub-assets within a group or asset. Model now processes data based on the updated group or asset structure.

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}

> [The Smart Rules (NEW) plugin](https://cumulocity.com/docs/streaming-analytics/smart-rules-plugin#what-is-the-smart-rules-plugin), which internally uses Analytics Builder models, behaves in this same way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This change is also applicable to [The Smart Rules (NEW) plugin](https://cumulocity.com/docs/streaming-analytics/smart-rules-plugin#what-is-the-smart-rules-plugin)
```

{{</ c8y-admon-info >}}

#### Model de-activation Scenarios.
Models are automatically deactivated in the following cases:

- If the input device or output device of the model is deleted.
- When the parent group or asset configured in the model is deleted.

> In such cases, the model is de-activated and an error message is recorded in the logs.

Reviewer 2: just the error message or don't we change the runtime state too?

Author: runtime state is FAILED for the mode, I will mention it as audit log. 3faeb803b7315bd02426a332263863bc26f3e1c6

#### Handling Structural Changes
Models also automatically adapt to structural changes within a device hierarchy. This includes:

> - Re-arrangement of devices within groups or assets

Reviewer 2: Not sure what this refers to ? The below points do talk about adding and removing devices ... surely that's more explicit than re-arrangement

Author: Could not come with a proper word.  using the structural changes seems repetitive. 
092433fb444e4822f8743cbdd268a106527905eb changed it to layout.

- Addition of new devices

> - Removal of existing devices

Reviewer 2: and deletion of devices

Reviewer 2: and addition of groups?

Author: 092433fb444e4822f8743cbdd268a106527905eb mentioned device, asset and group

<br></br>
{{< c8y-admon-info >}}

> When a model is deployed to process a group of devices, all devices may be removed from the group, leaving the group with zero devices. The model will not be deactivated, and it will automatically resume processing whenever a device is added back to the group.

Reviewer 2: why will devices be removed from a group? This surely sounds like a bug

Is this even correct? Doesn't make any sense

Author: This was a specific scenario discussed during. I went through the commits and added it.

https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/apama-in-c8y/pull/6055#issue-3650394937

{{< /c8y-admon-info >}}

#### Limitations to these changes.

> - Cascaded deletion of a sub-group is not supported. The model must be undeployed and redeployed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Deletion of nested group and cascaded deletion of devices is not supported. The model must be un-deployed and redeployed to refer to the updated group hierarchy
```
